# Things I Wish I'd Learned Sooner
I was talking to a teenager recently. They're interested in very many of the same things I was interested in at their age, and I'm still interested in today — computers, programming, technology, science, the world at large. So we were talking about their possible career paths, and it got me thinking about my own career path. I consider my career to be quite successful, but I had a bit of a slow start and a few detours. So I thought I'd review my career and my life and see what advice I would give myself as a teenager on my way to college.

## Networking
I remember being told that "networking" was very important to my career. But I didn't really understand it. I was around 30 when I finally figured it out. Networking doesn't mean schmoozing and drinking and bragging about yourself. It's more about going to events where people in your industry might be. (As Woody Allen once said, 80 percent of success in life is just showing up.) Find groups and meetups where you can meet people. Ask them what they're interested in, and talk to them about your mutual interests. Make acquaintances, make friends.

Get in front of a crowd and teach them something you've learned. Yes, it can be very scary. But it's also exhilarating to have done it. Start with a small group. Everyone watching wants you to do well, and is interested in what you have to show them and tell them. I guarantee that there's a meetup somewhere that is looking for speakers, and would love to have you give a talk.

## Exercise
We had PE (Physical Education) in grade school and high school. I was outside a lot as a kid, and pretty active. I played a little intramural sports in college. But apparently my physical education wasn't as good as it should have been. I became sedentary, exercising less and less. (I'd always spent a lot of time in front of the TV and the computer.) I remember I gained 6 inches on my waist (32" to 38") in the 6 years after I got an office job sitting all day. I had spurts of activity, mostly jogging in the park near my apartment. But I exercised less and less as the years went on.

I'm pretty sure I told myself "I'll start exercising and taking care of my body when I turn 50". And I did! One of the biggest reasons we moved to Southern California was to force us to have an active lifestyle. But boy, do I regret those 20+ years of inactivity. My body hurts all the time now. I can't do enough yoga to catch up with the deficit I put my physical health in. My brain was greedy and wanted all of my time for itself. But that was dumb, because exercising benefits the brain just as much as it benefits your body.

Right after I moved to Long Beach, I found yoga. There's free yoga in the park every day, in a park overlooking the ocean, walking distance from where we live. It's a magical place for me — it's almost always warm and sunny there, with a cool breeze. Yoga calms my mind while stretching and strengthening my body. It's my go-to exercise, but I also mix in some walking, biking, a fun "boot camp", and some weights. Find the exercises that work for you, whatever it is that will keep you at it. If you don't know where to start, find someone to help you. Or find some videos on YouTube. I found a pilates instructor I enjoy.

## Money
Live within your means. That means spending less than you make. You've got to be able to save money to get ahead. Einstein called compound interest the 8th wonder of the world: "he who understands it, earns it ...  he who doesn't ... pays it". Learn how to invest your money. There's actually a pretty standard set of rules on where you should put your money, but it's not easy to find. Basically, it goes: pay off high-interest debt, matched (Roth) 401K contributions, (Roth) IRA, unmatched 401K contributions. Put your investments in index mutual funds, unless you really want to learn a lot about investing. Suze Orman and Dave Ramsey generally give good financial advice.

## Be More Outgoing
I'm an introvert by nature. But I've worked for a very long time to be more outgoing. It's paid off immensely. Part of it was learning to be okay with being uncomfortable. Then I was able to open up and talk to people and learn from them, and get excited about things together.

I've seen a lot of research lately that says that your happiness is strongly correlated with your friendships. Seek out and build strong friendships. Find people you share interests with, and use that as a step towards a friendship. Many of them will turn out to be loose friendships, but that's OK too — that's another part of your network.

Be kind. Give to others. The more you give of yourself and bring happiness to others, the more it will come back to you. This is yet another Zen/Judo move — abundance comes to you by giving, not taking.

## Make Good Decisions
You can't change the hand you've been dealt in life. But you can change how you react. And you can expose yourself to opportunities. I'm kind of a go-with-the-flow type of person. The Universe provides what you need, but you have to see it, and you have to set yourself up to succeed in the future by the choices you make today.

I often think about future-me when I'm making decisions. Which option would server future-me the best? When we were talking about maybe moving to California, I asked "which would we regret more --- having moved to California and failed, or not having tried?" We almost always regret the things we didn't do, much more than the things that we tried, even if we failed at them.

Another nice thing I've learned to say to myself is "I am open and willing to receive unexpected blessings". 

You can do a lot, but you can't do everything. You have to consciously choose where you focus your energy and attention. This might be the trickiest part for me; there are so many things I want to do in life, because I'm interested in and excited by so many things.

Don't put up with being around people who bring you down. Life is too short for that. People are choices. Surround yourself with people who make you feel good, who make you a better person.

## Embrace the Difficulty
Life is hard. But life is also miraculous and beautiful. We have to work through the difficult parts to enjoy the wonderful parts. Learn to live with ambiguity — you can't know all the answers; all you can do is work with the knowledge you've got at the time. The world isn't fair, but sometimes it's more than fair. Don't just accept that, embrace it. Lean into it. Become comfortable with being uncomfortable. You will fail sometimes. But don't make it worse by not picking yourself up and continuing toward your goals.

Embrace the difficulty, but find the joy. Focus on the joy and the beauty. Smile for no reason. Somehow it will make you happier. I've actually added smiling to my exercise routine. It makes me calm down and realize all the blessings I have around me. Express your gratitude — to yourself and to those around you.

## Take Chances
Being an adult takes so much time. It seems like there's not actually enough time in your life to do all the things you "need" to do — work, pay your bills, exercise, eat well, make friends, learn, relax, civic involvement. I can't tell you how to juggle all that. But your responsibilities and time commitments will tend to grow more over time, not less. Take advantage of that by using your time wisely. When you have more time, you have more time to make up for mistakes. So take chances earlier rather than waiting. Want to change careers? Start working on it now — don't wait! But take it slow; this is a marathon, not a sprint.

Here's the thing about taking chances — the likelihood of failure is lower than you think. And the consequences are probably not as bad as you think. So taking a chance usually pays off more than the cost of the failure. Taking chances is really the best way to be successful in life. So take more chances. Just make sure that you've done your homework, so that the odds will be in your favor. And be OK with and prepared for failure -- you'll get through it either way.

Ask that person out, make that career move, move to another state. I guarantee that taking more smart chances will lead to a better life than sitting there waiting for opportunity to come to you.

## Work on Yourself
Always work to improve yourself. Most days you should have made some progress on being a better person, being better than you were yesterday. I think this might be the secret to happiness. (That and having low expectations — aim high, but don't expect everything to work out.) But don't be too hard on yourself. If you're struggling, sometimes it's OK to just make it through to the next day.

Don't compare yourself to other people — compare yourself to who you were yesterday and who you can become in the future. Life isn't a competition, it's a journey. Enjoy the journey. Work together with friends and loved ones to find the best ways forward.

Surround yourself with people who can help you be a better person, people who make you feel good about yourself, people you can learn from. Maybe get a life coach. Definitely find some mentors, whether formal or informal. Don't be afraid to go talk to your professors during their office hours.

## Learning
You should always be learning. If you aren't learning, the world will leave you behind, and you'll start to feel lost. You should hopefully learn at least one new thing every day. Try to identify the things that you're learning. Write a journal, or a blog, or just a #TIL (today I learned) Tweet, to keep in mind how much you're always learning, and to share with others. Celebrate learning and encourage others to learn and grow as well.

One of the things I've noticed recently is that if you want to learn, you have to be willing to be wrong. You'll never know everything about any topic. So there's always something to learn. Get excited about learning and exploring and bettering yourself.

Learning from others is the biggest shortcut to avoiding failure. You'll still fail, but not nearly as much as you will if you _don't_ learn from others.

Muhammad Ali once said "a man who views the world the same at fifty as he did at twenty has wasted thirty years of his life".

Find what works for you. Find the tricks and tips that make your life better. Learning is the key that unlocks all of this for you.
